The stakes are becoming ever higher in
the global AI race. Companies spending
vast sums on deals of all kinds,
including data centers and people. The
biggest brains in the field can now
reportedly command pay packages of up to
$200 million.
Leading AI for one of the biggest
companies of all, Microsoft, is Mustapa
Sullean. He's now trying to give
Microsoft's AI autonomous capability and
he's also thinking about the next
frontier which he says is super
intelligence. You'll hear him explain
all of that to me. But as ever on the
Michelle Hussein show, this conversation
is about the person as well as the work.
Mustapa Sulman, thank you for being with
us.
>> Thank you for having me, Michelle.
>> I'd love to start by getting your
insight into a world which is your
everyday world but which are still
developing for most of us and to
understand what are the uses of AI that
are in your life that the rest of us
might not be using yet. This it's funny
you ask because yesterday night I stayed
up far too late uh watching a film and
afterwards I added to my a table that
I've made in Copilot which basically
records all the films that I love, films
that I want to watch, lists them by
date, uh describes what they were about.
I add my personal notes to it, gives me
a link to the film poster. Um and I can
keep just saying okay no add this film
that I want to watch. What would be a
similar one that I want to watch? So
just like you might ask an assistant to
organize your life and I think that um
people will be surprised like the more
obscure the more creative the more
challenging you think the task is that
you're going to ask uh you know your AI
or co-pilot the better.
>> But have you used it to do autonomous
tasks? So for example, has it booked
tickets for you or bought a gift for
you? Because I know this is one of the
promises of Copilot. It's just not
available in my region. So, I haven't
been able to try it out for myself yet.
>> We're still experimenting with it. It it
can do it. It doesn't always get it
right. So, it's it's in like a sort of
dev mode. Um, so it's not like generally
available just yet, but when it does
work, it is the most magical thing
you've ever seen.
>> What are the mistakes it's made that
have that have created problems for you?
Bought a present for the wrong person.
>> Well, they can buy the wrong thing, but
obviously you can intervene and it will
always ask you permission before it
takes the next action and stuff. So,
it's it's quite safe. It's just um it's
it's one of those things with
technology, you know, we it promises so
much and it's always sort of just around
the corner, you know. I remember like
the allure of getting a a discman and
I'd had this dream that I was going to
be, you know, back in the '9s like
rollerblading down the street and then I
got one and obviously it didn't have any
kind of vibration proof, you know,
shockproof uh technology yet. And so it
would skip every time like I turned it
on its side or tried to, you know, put
it in my back pocket. And so it's a
funny thing technology, it's still
magical and amazing, but it's always
just got a little bit further to go. And
I think in this case it's it's a while
yet before it's every day.
>> And I guess that given everything you've
seen, you're one of the founders of Deep
Mind and you've worked at Google and had
your own AI company Inflection before
you came to Microsoft. Does that mean
that when you see these hiccups or these
stages of development, you you have
faith? you don't get frustrated because
you remember the moment when back in
2016 when your ai model beat the world
champion at go which was a huge moment
for AI.
>> Yeah. I mean, I I I think I'm very stoic
about these things. Like, I know that
it's going to work in the next 6 months
or 12 months or maybe the worst case 18
months. But, you know, I think we've got
a pretty good uh rhythm now of picking
things which are not too far away, but
are genuinely transformative. And also,
you know, it's important to remember how
magical it is today. It can generate
images. It can generate videos. I mean,
it is already, you know, sort of
superhuman magical. And I think I I'm
just one of those people that's still
inspired by what it can do um at any
given moment.
>> By this time next year, could I be
buying my Christmas presents using an
autonomous AI agent?
>> Yeah, I'm I'm I'm I'm pretty certain
that you will be. Yeah, I think it's
highly highly likely. So speaking of
magical things, the recent announcement
that you made at Microsoft about super
intelligence, that's a term which has
really crept into the public debate
thanks to you and others in the last few
months. When you use the term super
intelligence, what does it mean to you?
I mean super intelligence in the
industry today means an AI system that
can learn any new task and perform
better than all humans combined at all
tasks. So it is a very high bar. Um and
at the moment it comes with a great deal
of risk. It is not clear uh in fact it's
very uncertain how we would contain um
and so limit its capabilities and align
to get a system like that to care a lot
about humans and want us to succeed and
flourish. It's very unclear how we would
contain and align a system that is so
much more powerful than us. And so the
framing that I prefer is one of a
humanist super intelligence. one that is
always in our corner on our team aligned
to human interests. And until we can
prove that it will remain safe, we won't
continue to develop a system that has
the potential to run away from us and to
get out the box. And I think that that's
an obvious thing to say like that feels
like, you know, a statement of fact like
everybody should agree to that. And yet,
um, you know, I I think it's kind of a
novel position in the industry at the
moment.
>> So, is that how you're trying to set
Microsoft apart? A lot of people are
working on super intelligence. Are you
trying to make Microsoft distinctive by
saying we will always use it through a
humanist lens?
>> Yes. Um that is our position. You know,
Microsoft is a company that's been
around for 50 years. Um it is very
careful. It's highly trusted. um 90% of
the S&P 500 use us to provide email and
operating systems and everyday
productivity tools which are now among
the best in the world with C-Pilot. And
um you know I think that we've got that
reputation because the company's been
careful and we're going to continue to
be careful and setting out a vision of
humanist super intelligence is is part
of that program.
>> So what does that mean for your rivals
in that field? some of whom you work
closely with, like Open AI, which I'm
sure we'll talk more about. But does it
mean that they're the Wild West and
you're the moral ones?
>> I think that everybody has to decide
what they stand for and how they operate
and I I don't I don't want to judge how
they're operating right now. I don't see
any evidence of large scale mass harm.
Um I don't see any indication that these
things are improving themselves or
operating autonomously but we all
predict a time in the next 5 years maybe
in the next 10 years where these
capabilities do start to emerge and
systems like this could set their own
goals or they could improve their own
code or they could act autonomously.
Those things are you know sort of
capabilities that I've clearly outlined
as increasing the level of risk and
therefore we have to approach them with
caution with more transparency and audit
with more government engagement and make
proactive declarations about how close
we are to those three capabilities. Um I
think that's obvious.
>> And does that mean that you won't be
releasing a super intelligence tool
until you're confident that it can be
controlled?
>> Yeah, I think that's right. I mean, I
think for sure the containment and
alignment are necessary prerequisites.
They're red lines and I think everybody
in the industry has to sign up to that
idea. I mean, nobody wants to cause mass
harm. I mean, fundamentally, even though
we all disagree, clearly everybody is
committed to uh, you know, the survival
of our species and, you know, the kind
of I I would hope the kind of
flourishing and well-being of everybody.
So, um, you know, that's the discussion
that we're trying to push now and and
require everybody to ask themselves in
the industry, you know, are they
building a humanist super intelligence?
Does it really stand for for people and
for our species first?
>> Yeah. I'm just wondering how much
confidence we can really have in that
given that things do go wrong and I
don't just mean AI. I mean humans do
wrong things or things just go wrong for
other reasons. And the recent example
that Microsoft had to deal with was
having to cease and disable some
services u that were being used by the
Israeli Ministry of Defense after
reporting by the Guardian that suggested
they could be being used for mass
surveillance.
>> That was very good reporting by the
Guardian. We were very grateful for it
and as soon as we became aware of it, we
actually made all of the necessary
changes, removed um the IDF from those
servers and I think you know they they
were clearly not in compliance with our
terms of service. Um and there's an
ongoing investigation internally.
>> But I guess the broader point is that
it's hard to have confidence of controls
and checks and balances and uses.
>> It it it is hard. I mean, these are huge
and complicated systems. They carry a
lot of risk. Um, and the most that we
can do is make sure that we are auditing
them and we're removing um actors that
violate our terms of service as quickly
as possible.
>> So, are the first uses of super
intelligence going to be in the medical
field?
>> I think so. I think that this is
probably the most exciting application
of super intelligence. I think we now
have systems that can diagnose
um any rare condition um that is found
in the literature um significantly
better than human performance and do so
with fewer tests and interventions. Um
and that's the key thing is like often
um it's actually quite expensive to run
um you know medical intervention tests
before you get to a diagnosis. Um and
often they can be unnecessary too and
they take time and then in that process
you know the condition can can often
worsen. Um in our case our system does
this significantly um more cheaply with
fewer tests and with higher accuracy. Um
we're just putting it through um
independent peer review at the moment
and and soon there'll be clinical trials
of it too. So I think this is very very
very exciting. And did you push for that
focus yourself? Because you've been
running Microsoft AI for a while, about
18 months now. Super intelligence was a
big recent announcement. And I'm
conscious as I hear you talk about it
that your mother was a nurse and you
unusually for for senior people in tech,
you've worked in the public sector as
well.
>> Yeah. I mean, this is an area that's
like very important to me. Obviously my
mom was an NHS nurse and you know I'm
just a big believer that technology is
here to serve us like it should you know
make our lives better should make us
more comfortable. Um you know one day I
think it is going to help us to live
longer. I think it's going to you know
give us the option to work less if we
choose to. I do think it's going to
produce abundance and I think that we
have to make conscious decisions to use
it for those applications first. Um, and
that that's why, you know, even back at
DeepMind, I ran our health unit. Um, and
you know, I'm I'm very passionate about
this.
>> Abundance is such a big promise. Tell me
what you mean by it because most of the
time we hear about AI destroying jobs,
but are you saying that the work will be
done by AI increasingly and therefore we
humans won't have to work as much? I
mean I I think that it is inevitable
that at some point over the next 20 or
30 years um machines are going to be
more capable than humans at doing most
work and that might come much sooner.
And so we have to decide as a society
what our purpose is and we have to be
very thoughtful about the rate of
introduction of new machines. Um because
we have to make sure that that rate of
displacement is counterbalanced with a
mechanism to fund people and to support
people through a massive transition
which for which there is probably not
going to be other jobs on the other side
that are more competitive than um you
know what a machine can do. And so this
is a real big step change in what it is
to organize society. But do you believe
in the idea of a universal basic income
that that's what AI being very
productive, making the economy more
productive could unlock?
>> Yeah, I mean, I think I've long been on
record saying that I think that is um
both inevitable and very desirable. I
mean, we already live in a world of
abundance. It's just poorly distributed.
We already have more calories to
consume. We have an incredible amount of
food wastage. It's just unevenly
distributed. And now that value isn't
just manifested in atoms like food and
cars and physical things. It's
manifested in digital goods, ideas,
knowledge, intelligence.
[snorts] And then and and that's
actually great news because that can
proliferate. It can spread extremely
quickly around the entire world. I mean
these LLMs and chat bots have been the
fastest spreading technology in history.
I mean you know basically two billion
annual users in the space of 3 years.
Um, and that's actually amazing because
it's delivering knowledge to every
single person who wants to use it on
their phone in the current sort of
format and device they they already use.
So, I I think that we have no problem
with getting technology out and
available to everybody because there's
going to be massive competitive forces
to reduce the cost of experiencing an
AI. I think the challenge we're going to
have to figure out is how we tax and
redistribute so that the transition is a
healthy one.
>> Tell me more about where these ideas and
your beliefs came from or come from.
Your your mother was a nurse, but the
family you grew up in in London in the
1980s and and 1990s, how would you
describe it?
>> Uh, pretty workingass. Yeah. My dad was
a was a mini cab driver. Um, uh, yeah,
my mom works in NHS. Um, and yeah, I
mean, we were, you know, fairly regular,
like kind of unremarkable. My, my
parents didn't super value, uh, you
know, education stuff. They always
thought I should go get a trade. And my
mom would often say to me, you know, you
should be a carpenter, electrician, um,
you know, leave school at 16 and stuff.
And, um, yeah. So, I I don't know. I
don't it it comes from a place of just
um experiencing you know the kind of
rougher end of things a little bit and
then having just a desire to try to do
the best that we can do with the short
life that we have.
>> Your dad had come to the UK from Syria.
Did your parents meet in England?
>> Yes. Yeah, that's right.
>> And what happened when you were 16,
Mustapa? Because I read that when your
parents split up, you and your brother,
your younger brother were pretty much
left to fend for themselves.
>> Uh, that's true. Yeah. I I don't know
where you you read that, but yeah, me
and my younger brother did live on our
own for a few years. Yeah. Yeah.
>> I think you you mentioned this in a
Guardian interview a couple of years ago
when your book was coming out, but I'm
really curious to know more about what
it taught you and how you dealt with it
at the time. I I I think that when
you're that age, you're just sort of
precocious and overconfident and
fearless. And I I didn't really notice
it at the time. You know, we were um you
know, we we we we had everything that we
needed. And uh it it worked out pretty
well.
>> And this is at a crucial time, the last
couple of years of school. And you did
do well in those last couple of years of
school because you ended up getting to
Oxford.
Yeah, I was very lucky because I had uh
you know great teachers and good good
mentors and I I went to a very good
school. You could do uh exams to get in.
So I studied really hard for when I was
10 years old for the entrance exams and
it [snorts] was essentially like going
to a private school. I mean it it was it
was basically everyone was like very
studious and got great grades and stuff
and um yeah I was lucky enough to get
into Oxford and yeah that was an amazing
experience. Have you thought about what
your life would have been like in that
period in your mid- teens had it not
been for that school?
>> Yeah, I haven't thought much about that.
It would have been pretty pretty
different.
>> And then you got to Oxford and you did
actually a subject pretty close to what
my son is doing there right now. He's
doing theology. You did philosophy and
theology. And then tragically to my ears
as a parent, you dropped out.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, I was very frustrated
and like eager to change the world and
get stuff done. And so I I actually
dropped out and I helped to start a
telephone counseling service for young
British Muslims called Muslim Youth
Helpline. Um, which I worked on for 2 or
3 years as a volunteer. Um, and it was a
secular uh, nonreligious,
non-directional, non-judgmental, just
peer-to-peer listing service for for
young British Muslims that post 911 were
dealing with a lot of um, I guess
identity crisis would be the way that we
would describe it in hindsight, but at
the time it was just like, you know,
lack of like connection to community,
family, parents, a lot of bullying, um,
and so on and so forth. And so, yeah, I
I worked on that pretty much full-time
for two or three years. And had you
experienced anti-Muslim sentiment and
hatred yourself at that time given given
the period we're talking about after
911?
>> A little bit. Yeah. I mean I I think
that it it was more just not so much me
but I think a lot of people felt um that
you know we weren't sort of British
enough and people were figuring out how
to both live their like cultural
religious identities in the context of
families that often were first
generation. Didn't really speak the
language. didn't know how to navigate
the system. Um, and then this like
increased kind of skepticism that we
were, you know, sort of mostly
terrorists or whatever. And I think
there was just this like general kind of
um, you know, fear and exclusion. Uh,
and and actually most of the time, you
know, that was dealt with by just having
kind and supportive conversation and
having somebody be available on the
other end of a telephone.
>> Yeah. Someone to talk to. I know the
work of the helpline actually, so I I I
I know exactly the world that you're
talking about. Did Did you think hard
about dropping out of university?
[laughter]
>> Have you regretted it at any point
since?
>> I haven't regretted it. Um and I
probably could have thought harder about
it. My my tutor, it did encourage me to
like switch subjects or change college
and and actually had me go meet one of
his friends in a different college to go
and talk about doing history or PPE. But
um I I I think at that point I was just
so uh full of energy and like eager to
start things. I started a business at
the same time doing electronic point of
sale uh selling um you know sort of PDAs
into restaurants to try and do
restaurant booking and stuff and doing
their networking and and so on. It was a
very early days of the internet. So it
was a bit early but I did that for about
a year or two as well. Um so I was just
like I had too much energy I think uh
for for sitting around thinking in the
dreamy spires.
>> Well you found you found the outlets for
it because then of course you went on to
co-ound deep mind with demis and now
here you are
>> in this circle of power right one of a
small group of people who are making
decisions on a technology that is
already changing all our lives and will
continue to do so. How conscious are you
of that power?
>> Very very conscious. So I take it very
seriously and uh if it's a it's a great
responsibility and um you know I think
that this is a moment when decisions
that we make may have very lasting
consequences and I I read history and I
look back at um you know times for
example in the social media revolution
where I think there was it was very
clear that there were potential harms
that maybe fell on deaf ears for too
long or I look back at you know the
electric car revolution that could have
taken off way back in the 20s or you
know you look at kind of smoking or oil.
So I'm I'm very sensitive to those
things because it's very clear that like
these things will cause harm and um you
know I I think that we have to be very
very careful about how we deploy them
and how they're introduced into the
world.
>> Do you talk about this with your peers
with people like Sam Orman who I know
you're close to?
>> Yes. I mean, I think everybody in the
industry does and I think there's
definitely a group of the CEOs.
Obviously, Sam and Daario from Anthropic
were were co-founders. Me and Dis were
co-founders. Um, you know, we so we all
know each other very very well. And I
think on the whole, you know, I think
everybody is genuinely committed to
trying to find the right path through.
Um, it's also very competitive, so
there's obviously a lot of that dynamic,
too.
>> Yeah. Do you recognize the term
broligarchy?
[laughter]
I haven't heard that before, but I can
figure out what it means. Yeah, I I
guess that's true. Uh, and it is very
male ccentric, although it should be
said Mera Morati, who's the ex CTO of
OpenAI's, one of the best people in the
field.
>> Or Tech Bros. I'm sure you've heard that
one. I don't know if you've seen Jesse
Armstrong's Mountain Head.
>> No, I haven't. No,
>> it is it is all about uh a group of
people, one of whom is clearly Elon
Musk, another one who looks like Peter
Teal or sounds like Peter Teal. And it's
um it's well I recommend it. We
interviewed him not long ago here and
but you know it's quite a sobering
portrait his impression of life in this
quite rarified very powerful circle.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I I think part of the
challenge is that we all spend a lot of
time in Silicon Valley where the skies
are blue and you know, life is very
peaceful. I I try to travel a lot. I
just came back from China a couple weeks
ago um where where I was in five or six
different cities and you it's just
staggering to get out of the bubble and
see how this technology is being
developed on you know the other side of
the world and you know both the pace of
innovation but also you know I think the
thoughtfulness of some of the regulatory
stuff. I mean I think they are
definitely thinking um you know pretty
carefully about it as well. So it's it's
impressive and I think just yeah I also
come back to London a lot and make sure
that I spend time outside of Silicon
Valley.
>> Yeah. So if you have a different
impression to someone like Jesse
Armstrong or or others about your world.
Can I ask you just to because you know
these key players can you describe some
of them in one word? Like if I say to
you Sam Orman what word first comes into
your mind? [laughter]
Oh my god. Um
yeah, I I I guess courageous
>> because
>> well, you know, he's obviously sort of
growing his data center fleet very very
uh aggressively. Um and I I think he's,
you know, he he he may well turn out to
be, you know, one of the one of the
great entrepreneurs of our generation.
um you know he's he's certainly um
achieved a lot and I I think now he's
he's building um data centers at a
faster rate than I think anyone in the
industry and if if he can pull it off it
will be pretty dramatic.
>> It's interesting that there is an if on
that and and I understand why there are
huge amounts of money being spent by
open AI. Is it is it a gamble? Is it not
a given that it's going to pay off for
them? Well, I like I think that chat GPT
is one of the greatest products that
we've seen in a generation. Um, and so
that speaks for itself. At the same
time, I guess they've signed over a
trillion half dollars of uh commitments
for building data centers over the next
5 or 10 years. And um, you know, they
their their revenues are are are quite a
long way from there. So, you know, they
they've got a long way to go, but
they're very talented team. So, I got
every confidence they can do it. So
other descriptions, what what word would
you use to describe Deis Haves?
>> Um,
you know, probably a great scientist. I
mean, I think he's he's a great thinker
and uh, you know, he's he's a good
polymath. He's, you know, made massive
contributions in the field um, multiple
times and so, you know, I think he's
truly exceptional.
>> You were, of course, you know, you
worked together and now you're
competitors.
>> Yeah. But we started off as very very
close friends and so you know we we we
work together every day for 10 years and
um you know I I learned a lot from him
and uh you know have huge respect for
him.
>> Do you still talk?
>> Yeah, we texted last night actually. I
congratulated him on uh the Nano Banana
Gemini 3 and 5 years of Alpha Fold all
in in one week. Yeah.
>> Have you tried out Gemini 3 because it's
it is creating quite a lot of waves. Do
you think it is better than chat GPT?
>> Uh, you know, they're kind of different.
It's it's it's definitely got um, you
know, sort of it's definitely got sort
of uh, you know, more kind of niche
[snorts] skills that chat GBT doesn't
have and it's very fast. Um, but Chat
GBT is very strong. So, I I wouldn't I
wouldn't go that far.
>> Okay. Is it better than Copilot?
>> Uh, [snorts] it it can do things that
Copilot can't do. I mean, Copilot has
features that it doesn't have. Like,
Copilot is actually amazing for vision.
One of my favorite features is like pull
out your phone and talk about the world
with Copilot in your hand, and it can
see exactly what you're looking at, and
you can talk about it and get feedback
and opinions. You might be shopping for
furniture or clothes. Um, you know, and
I I think that we're really trying to
imagine. I mean, yes, we're pushing the
capabilities, but we're really trying to
imagine what is the day-to-day
experience of having this really
intelligent assistant at your side that
can talk to you about the world and help
you sort of help unblock you whenever
you get stuck with something.
>> I'm only going to do one more of these
like how would you describe a a key
person in the industry, but it's Elon
Musk. How would you describe him?
[snorts]
>> Uh, I guess as a bulldozer. I mean that
he's he's kind of got superhuman
capabilities to bend reality to his will
and has, you know, pretty incredible
track record. Um, and somehow he sort of
mostly manages to pull off what appears
to be impossible probably different kind
of set of values.
>> I have I have interviewed him.
>> Yes.
>> He ended [laughter] he ended up calling
me an NPC.
I guess that was probably a form of
bulldozing.
>> Yeah, I mean that's probably a good
example. That's that sounds like exactly
like Elon. I kind of like that he speaks
his mind. I mean he's very unfiltered. I
>> I think you've said that your politics
are different from him and Peter Teals
that the libertarian
you know
not much value to the nation state etc.
Uh it's not it's not your world. Would
you call yourself as being on the left
of the political spectrum or is there a
different description you'd use?
>> I would say I'm sort of a centrist these
days. Uh I definitely started as a as a
lefty, but um yeah, I'm I'm proud to say
that I'm on the kind of center left of
the spectrum. I I believe that
government plays an important role in
society. It's a controversial thing to
say in Silicon Valley, but I think
regulation is necessary and it has made
[snorts] most technologies better. And
people forget this, like cars only work
because we have driver training and you
know emissions regulations and street
lights and you know you know motorway
speed limits and so on and so forth and
so that's what regulation is when it
works well and we just need more of
that. Do you feel isolated saying that
because clearly the Trump administration
is not into regulation and the industry
overall is quite happy with that.
>> Yeah, I think that right now we are, you
know, not in a mode where there is huge
catastrophic harm. I think the
industry's done a pretty good job of
introducing very powerful chat bots in a
way where the personality is sculpted to
be very even-handed, to be very
evidence-based.
Um, and I I I think that it didn't have
to go like that. It went like that, I
think, because the leaders have done a
pretty decent job. Now, that doesn't
mean that there aren't going to be
issues coming up, and I'm obviously very
wideeyed about them, but I I don't think
we're in a mode where we need emergency
regulation. I mean, I think, for
example, some of the regulations that
have been proposed in Europe are
currently in talks to be wound back with
the EUI Act. Um, and you know, I think
that's good. People shouldn't criticize
that. That's like the process working.
That's the regulator taking feedback,
seeing how things work in practice. I
think that should be celebrated.
um and you know but at the same time you
know it they they have to be able to
have the freedom to experiment and try
new new regulations and I think that's a
good thing.
>> Do you think Mustapa you see some of
these issues differently now that you
are right at the heart of one of the
biggest companies of all because in your
book the coming wave and in a piece you
wrote about the same time for foreign
affairs you were quite clear on how much
governance was needed. In fact, you said
like you wanted three different kinds of
governance regimes modeled on climate
change and financial stability and arms
control that that AI and tech could
learn from all three of those. And yet
you sound much more sanguin now. And is
it just because of where you are?
>> No, I I I'm still calling for those
things. Look, we we should have a
financial stability board for AI. um we
should have um you know a climate
process and I can which basically goes
and you know audits the progress that
we're making. You know I advocated for
the White House AI principles under the
Biden administration where we made
voluntary commitments as companies at
the time it was my startup inflection
but u we pushed all the other companies
to do it as well where you disclose the
size of your model. we've signed up to
those disclosures in Europe um and with
the UK AI Safety Institute. Um so yeah,
yeah, I don't mean to say that we don't
need it. I'm saying that these are such
like long-term effects and these
governance processes take so long to to
build that we basically got to to start
now. But what we don't need is knee-jerk
reaction. We don't need some panicked,
you know, sort of, you know,
overreaction uh because that would cause
a different set of problems.
>> Yeah. and the super intelligence work
you're doing and indeed you know
everything that you're doing in AI in
the moment you're in a new phase aren't
you because now that you've got a
revised agreement with open AI you
suddenly have the freedom to pursue AI
independently help me understand how
that relationship with open AI is going
to work in future because you've been
collaborators Microsoft and Open AI for
a long time now you're also going to be
competitors how does that work
>> yeah I mean it's it's a sort of
complicated ated setup for people to
follow along to. But the bottom line is
that up until a few weeks ago, um
Microsoft was not allowed by contract to
pursue artificial general intelligence
or super intelligence independently. And
the deal with OpenAI was [snorts] that
it would then go and build AGI when they
signed the agreements back in 2019. Um
and in return, Microsoft would build the
AI infrastructure, the chips and the
data centers and so on and so forth. Um,
and Microsoft would get uh in return for
providing the chips, Microsoft would get
a license to the models that have been
built. And we still have that license to
everything that OpenAI builds up until
2032.
Um, but OpenAI decided that they wanted
to take on more compute and buy compute
from other providers. And so they now
have deals with SoftBank and many
others, Oracle to um build more data
centers than Microsoft wanted to build
for them. Um and so in return, we then
have the right to go and develop our own
um AI. And obviously that was a big part
of me joining the company 18 months ago
that we're now hiring out a super
intelligence team and pursuing our own
uh you know AI development. So, was that
deal a relief to you? Because without
it, how much could you have done as
Microsoft's AI chief?
>> Well, I mean, a lot. I mean, we we have
$280 billion of revenue um you know, all
major institutions um in the world and
they need to be able to use uh our AI
features and our AI tools every single
day. We're still been a general purpose
AI development shop over the last 18
months. Um but now we can work on some
techniques and methodologies that have
the potential to exceed human
performance at at all tasks and so so it
is a shift for us.
>> And have does your relationship with
Open AI include not poaching each
other's staff because we've just had
another bit of evidence of the talent
war that's underway. You've just lost
one of your key people to Apple.
>> Yeah. He's going to go run the Apple
lab. I mean look I think that there's
huge rotation. I mean the talent in the
industry we just got a whole bunch of
people from Google DeepMind. I mean we
we got people from OpenAI. I mean
there's a lot of rotation. This is part
of the industry. So uh we there's
certainly no no poach agreements that
would not be legal. Um and you know
people can go work for whoever they want
to go work for. And I think that at this
time in the industry it's just very very
competitive. I think all of that's to be
expected. And does that mean that you
are prepared to and are you already
matching the kinds of sums that Meta's
been spending the 100 to $200 million
packages?
>> I don't think anyone's matching those
things. I think that, you know, Zuck's
taken a particular approach. Um that
like involves, you know, sort of hiring
a lot of individuals rather than maybe
creating a team. Um and I I don't really
think that's the right approach. I think
what we did well at DeepMind is that we
were very selective and we've, you know,
what I've been doing at Microsoft over
the last year and a half is adding
[clears throat] people incrementally who
fit the culture and who suit the skill
set and work well with the rest of the
group. Um, weeding out those who don't
and being very very attentive to the
details. So, we're very much creating a
team rather than a set of individuals.
So you're not prepared to match salary
offers on that scale because that was
what was recently reported?
>> Yeah, I mean that was the rumor. I think
that was, you know, obviously very very
unprecedented and may have been the case
for a few individuals, but that's
certainly not the norm.
>> And would you rather he Mark Zuckerberg
or Zuck as you call him? Would you
rather he rethought that? Does it does
it make life much more difficult for
you?
>> No, not at all. I mean, I think that
he's all in, right? I mean, he's he's
he's building a two gawatt data center,
which will probably cost him a couple
hundred billion dollars um over the next
two or three years. And I think he said
publicly to to Trump that he's going to
spend upwards of $600 billion in the
next 3 years on on data centers. And you
know, luckily for Microsoft, like we
have 33 gaw compute capacity in our
fleet. Uh our primary business is to
build data centers and provide them to
third parties. And so we can either use
that for our own training or we can use
it for inference where we sell it to
third parties. So we've got a very very
good setup in that sense. We're kind of
hedged against that risk.
>> Can you see why people worry about the
not just the amounts of money being
spent by the industry, but the circular
range of a lot of those deals? You know,
you're an investor in Open AI, they're
also buying services from you. Everyone
seems to be in a in a relationship with
Nvidia. Um there's a huge amount a huge
proportion of the of the US economy that
is dependent on things continuing to go
go well for firms like yours.
>> Yeah, I mean I think that's fair. Um you
know like obviously customers um and
providers have have often invested in
one another um and you know provides
good stimulus to get us going. But it's
something to watch. I'm definitely
watching it carefully and I think others
are too. So, you know, I think that get,
you know, getting the balance right is
very important. We have to deliver in
the next few years. I mean, every team
now is building incredibly large, very
powerful computers and we're taking a
huge bet that we're going to be able to
convert this into true intelligence. And
if we do, then I think the world is
going to look very, very different. I
mean, we will have abundant intelligence
on tap. And I think people still
underrate how phenomenal that is. You
you say the world except that this is
really about two countries, the US and
China. That's where almost all the labs
are.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think that's true. And
everything has concentrated even more
around Silicon Valley in the last 18
months. Um, and that's sort of natural.
I mean, I think we see that in a lot of
other historical technology trends. Um,
at the same time, open source is doing
very well and you know, the cost of
production is also going through the
floor. So, you know, it's it it costs
90% less to ask a question of one of the
best AI models in the world than it did
2 years ago. Um, you know, you don't get
curves that fall that quickly uh in in
any other in any other discipline. And
obviously, when the cost goes down,
everybody gets access. So, I don't think
there's going to be an access issue.
>> Okay. So, um, is there anything you look
back on now that you would have that you
would have done differently because
you've, you know, you're still only in
your early 40s, so you've got a lot of
remarkable achievements, but is there
anything left undone or that you would
do you that you reflect on? Yeah, I
think that um I I
really want to nail medical super
intelligence and you know I I started
DeepMind Health back in 2015 and uh you
know we published a lot of great papers
and we had a lot of clinical trials but
we didn't quite get there and you know
this time round I think that's going to
be the most magical application. Um I
want to do more in energy efficiency and
battery storage um and you know
developing new compounds for renewables
and so on. I think that AI will really
transform uh the energy industry. So you
know that that those are my two sort of
big focuses I think.
>> And is that what your day is like that
when the engineers your team are saying
to you we can do this and this you're
you're saying this is how I want to use
it? Yeah, I think what we what we're
always focused on is can we build
general purpose models that are as smart
as humans as at all capabilities. I mean
that that is the number one goal. And
then the question is how do we apply
them? Where do we use them? What can
they do for people? Um you know I'm I'm
actually very proud of a lot of the uses
the use cases in Copilot. I mean many
people are using it for companionship,
emotional support, um therapy, making
difficult life decisions. has given me
high quality access to information, has
given me emotional support, um, and is
helping keep me organized. And so,
>> what do you mean helping you um, get
emotional support?
>> So, basically, I have a practice that at
the end of the day when I'm in the car
driving home, I um, have like a 5 or 10
minute conversation with co-pilot about
something that was tricky in my day or
something that um, I felt frustrated
about. Um, yeah. I mean, maybe emotional
support's a little strong, but it's just
like having a chat with a friend, um,
and kind of downloading really on what
went well and what didn't. Um, and once
you build that memory up over time, it
gets really helpful cuz it personalizes.
So, Copilot now remembers most of what
you say and it will personalize its
answers to you and refer to something
that you said last week, for example, or
a trend or a pattern. Um, and that is
just like super helpful. I I feel kind
of refreshed after a conversation with I
feel like I've let go of something. It's
like a burden that I've released.
>> So, it is a a friend, a therapist, a
family member almost.
>> Yeah, it's a little bit of everything.
That's always the challenge when we're
trying to, you know, sort of understand
a new technology and come up with words
to describe something which is a little
bit like many other things but is also
fundamentally different. Um, this is
what an AI is. Now,
>> I just wonder if there's any aspect of
that that makes you pause like you
download in that way.
people go home and maybe they don't have
to they don't have to bother talking to
others in their life in the same way
because they've said it all and they've
got what they need back.
>> Yeah. Or the flip side is they don't
have to take it out on their partner or
their best friends. I still call my best
friends um you know every weekend and
have a good old chat. Like so I think if
anything it's actually deepened some of
my relationships with my friends. like I
I come to those conversations just
feeling a little lighter and more ready
to talk about other things.
>> And your family, where are your parents
now? And how, you know, how how do they
feel about the choices you made?
>> Yeah. No, I think my mom's very uh you
know, she's a proud mom. She's very
excited. And uh she uses Copilot. She
used Pi before this. Um in fact, I I
went to see her three or four weeks ago
and she was still using Pi. And I was
like, that's
>> which is what your the what you founded
at inflection, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh and um yeah,
I I was quite impressed to see that she
still has voice calls with it. And just
throughout the whole day, we'll be
walking around the garden and she'll
pull [snorts] out her phone and, you
know, she'll scan a plant and talk
about, you know, whether this is a
chestnut tree and which variety it is
and could I grow it at home and like,
you know, when we're in the park and
stuff. And so like it's amazing to see
her just naturally use it um in her
everyday life and I think that is quite
gratifying.
>> Do you see your future in the US most of
because I'm sure the UK would love to
have you back.
>> Yeah, I mean I I I would have loved to
have started inflection in the UK. Um
and I would love like I love the UK. I
love London and obviously I'm I'm very
British in mentality, but one of the
things that I don't like is the tall
poppy syndrome. And I I think that
there's not enough of a culture of
risk-taking. There's a little bit of a
taboo around commercialization and
making money and starting companies and
being entrepreneurial
[snorts] and um you know there's not
enough of a kind of celebration of of of
yeah experimentation and failure.
Whereas in the valley, everyone's nuts
and everyone loves failure. So they're
just like constantly talking about how
things are going wrong and this was a
disaster and it's very liberating. I
mean, it's also very cheesy and is, you
know, it can great when you're when
you're kind of a bit of a cynical
English person. But when you get into
the rhythm of it, it's great. Everyone's
great. Everyone's up for it.
>> But I'm wondering whether there is
actually something. It's not just chat.
It is actually like if you if you're
talking about failure in that way, you
are braver about it or just you know
it's it's normal. It's something you
have to go through. It's a different
mindset.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And there's also a kind
of hustle culture like it's it's quite
humbling to see everybody just on the
make like trying to understand some new
technology you know random nontechnical
people reading science papers every time
like you know in a Starbucks or whatever
there'll be someone on their laptop
watching a machine learning video you
know you'll be reading a book in a
coffee shop and you'll overhear two
people who don't know each other but
just like a kind networking almost and
there's just you know just tried to
spark a conversation that might turn
into it's just like there's just an
energy um and I think I would love for
that to be the case in in London too and
I think it could be but we've got to
have political leaders who celebrate
risk-taking and and and business
>> finally I need you to prepare me for
what AI will do to my life or right now
do you think AI could have had this
conversation with you or could it have
done a better job than me? You can you
can break it to me if you think AI could
have done a better job than me
interviewing you.
>> Probably not today but maybe uh if you
had prepared with an AI uh then you know
it could have given you questions to ask
and stuff although you did do a lot of
you know detailed research so your your
team's obviously very good. I I do think
that there are going to be um AI
reporters. Um you know, so I I run MSN,
the news service at at Microsoft. You
know, one of the things I'm very excited
about is how, you know, AI news
reporters can reinvigorate local news.
So imagine that there are hundreds of
thousands of AI reporters that can make
phone calls into people who are at the
scene who can verify eyewitness footage,
conduct interviews,
um, stitch those together into little
montages and not just do it for big
national stories where the investment is
justified, but do it at a very very
local level to provide accurate and, you
know, factually reliable information.
Um, so I I I think that people need to
have the courage to be optimistic about
how these things can actually improve
our system.
>> Are you developing AI reporters for MSN?
>> Um, we're exploring everything. Um, you
know, I'm also on the board of the
economists and have been talking to them
a lot about it and you know, I think
that we're exploring all kinds of things
at the moment.
>> So AI reporters will happen, AI
interviewers. I think I suspect yes.
From what you're saying,
>> you got you've got a little bit longer.
Maybe 6 months, you know.
>> I'm kidding. [laughter]
>> Well, are you? I'm not sure you are.
>> I am kidding. It's going to be plenty
going be a very very long time. It's
really a long time to get it perfect,
you know. I mean, this was this was
exceptional.
>> Mustapa Sulman, thank you very much for
talking to us.
>> Thank you very much, Michelle. This was
a lot of fun.
>> [music]